TOPIC: PROCESSES
Category: Operating Systems (OS)

DEFINITION:
A Process is a program in execution — an active instance of a program that is loaded into memory and managed by the operating system. A program is a static set of instructions stored on disk; a process is the dynamic running entity with its own memory space, resources, and state. The OS manages all processes through the Process Control Block (PCB).

KEY CONCEPTS:
- Program vs Process: A program is passive (stored on disk). A process is active (running in memory). Multiple processes can run the same program simultaneously (e.g., two instances of a browser).
- Process Control Block (PCB): A data structure maintained by the OS for each process. Contains: Process ID (PID), process state, program counter, CPU registers, memory limits, open file list, scheduling information.
- Process States:
  - New: Process is being created.
  - Ready: Process is loaded in memory, waiting for CPU allocation.
  - Running: Process is currently executing on CPU.
  - Waiting/Blocked: Process is waiting for I/O or an event (e.g., disk read, user input).
  - Terminated: Process has finished execution.
- Context Switch: The OS saves the state (PCB) of the currently running process and loads the saved state of the next process. Enables multitasking. Has CPU overhead.
- Process Creation: Via fork() system call in Unix/Linux — creates a child process as an exact copy of the parent. exec() is used to replace the process image with a new program.
- Process Termination: Via exit() (normal) or killed by OS (abnormal). Resources are reclaimed.
- Zombie Process: A terminated child process whose exit status has not been read by the parent. The PCB remains in the system.
- Orphan Process: A child process whose parent has terminated. Adopted by init (PID 1).
- Inter-Process Communication (IPC): Mechanisms for processes to communicate — Pipes, Message Queues, Shared Memory, Sockets, Signals.

EXPLANATION:
The OS creates the illusion of running many programs simultaneously by rapidly switching the CPU between processes (multitasking). Each process has its own isolated virtual address space — a process cannot directly access another process's memory, which provides protection and stability. Context switching is the key mechanism: the OS periodically interrupts a running process (triggered by a timer interrupt), saves its complete state in the PCB, and loads the next process's state. This happens in milliseconds but adds overhead. IPC mechanisms allow cooperative processes to share data — shared memory is fastest (direct memory access) while pipes and message queues are simpler but slower. Understanding the process lifecycle, context switching, and IPC is foundational for OS interviews.

EXAMPLE:
Process State Transitions:
  New → Ready (when OS admits the process)
  Ready → Running (when CPU scheduler dispatches it)
  Running → Waiting (when process requests I/O)
  Waiting → Ready (when I/O completes)
  Running → Ready (when time quantum expires — preemption)
  Running → Terminated (when process calls exit())

Fork() in Unix:
  pid = fork()
  if (pid == 0):
    # This is the child process
    exec("ls")  # Replace child with 'ls' program
  else:
    # This is the parent process
    wait()  # Wait for child to finish

  After fork(): both parent and child continue executing from the next line.
  Parent gets pid = child's PID, child gets pid = 0.

Context Switch Steps:
  1. CPU timer interrupt fires → OS gains control
  2. OS saves running process's registers, PC, and state into its PCB
  3. OS selects next process from ready queue (scheduling)
  4. OS loads selected process's PCB (registers, PC)
  5. CPU resumes execution of new process

INTERVIEW TIP:
The key distinction to remember: a Process is heavyweight — it has its own memory space, file descriptors, and PCB. Creating/switching between processes is expensive. This is why Threads were introduced — multiple threads share the same process memory, making creation and context switching much cheaper. Always compare processes vs threads when discussing concurrency.
